+++
title = "Release 22.05 Highlights"
date = 2022-05-17T02:40:00Z
type = "post"
description = "Highlights of the 22.05 release."
in_search_index = true
+++

Helix 22.05 brings improves configuration and plenty of under-the-hood
improvements to the user-experience. Check out the [changelog] for the full
details.

> What is Helix? Helix is a modal text editor with built-in support for
> multiple selections, Language Server Protocol (LSP), tree-sitter, and
> experimental support for Debug Adapter Protocol (DAP).

Let's check out the highlights!

## Indentation Rework

The indentation system has been fully reworked. Indentation still works by
querying the parsed tree-sitter syntax tree for a document, but now query files
can use the full expressive power of tree-sitter queries rather than just
simple node names. Expect more robust indentation with fewer edge cases.

## Configurable Gutters

Gutters can now be configured in your `config.toml` file. For example, you can
remove the line-number gutter with a configuration like

```toml
[editor]
gutters = ["diagnostics"] # default is ["diagnostics", "line-numbers"]
```

## Local Language Configuration

Language configuration can now be specified local to a project. Create a
`.helix` directory and a `languages.toml` under it to override values from
the [default language configuration]. For example, override a C project's
indents to use tabs instead of spaces for indentation:

```toml
# my_c_project/.helix/languages.toml
[[language]]
name = "c"
indent = { tab-width = 8, unit = "\t" }
```

## Rulers

Vertical rulers may now be configured through the `rulers` option.

{{ asciinema(id="rulers", width="94", height="25") }}

## Visible Whitespace

Whitespace characters like spaces, tabs, and newlines may now be rendered.
Use the `whitespace.render` option either at runtime with the `:set` command
or in your `config.toml` under the editor section.

{{ asciinema(id="visible-whitespace", width="94", height="25") }}

## Up Next

Expect plenty more features and improvements in Helix 22.07 coming in July.
Contribute and follow along with development in the
[GitHub repository][helix-git] and be sure to join in on discussions in the
[Matrix channel][matrix].

<script src="/asciinema-player.js"></script>
[changelog]: https://github.com/helix-editor/helix/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#2205-2022-05-17
[default language configuration]: https://docs.helix-editor.com/guides/adding_languages.html#language-configuration
[helix-git]: https://github.com/helix-editor/helix/
[matrix]: https://matrix.to/#/#helix-community:matrix.org
