+++
title = "Release 22.05 Highlights"
date = 2022-05-28T13:00:00Z
type = "post"
description = "Highlights of the 22.05 release."
in_search_index = true
+++

Helix is a modal text editor with built-in support for multiple selections,
Language Server Protocol (LSP), tree-sitter, and experimental support for Debug
Adapter Protocol (DAP).

Today marks the 22.05 release, a featureful release with over double the number
of contributors as last release. A big thanks to all involved! 🙌

Let's check out the flashy features of 22.05.

## Indentation rework

The indentation system has been fully reworked. Indentation still works by
querying the parsed tree-sitter syntax tree for a document, but now query files
can use the full expressive power of tree-sitter queries rather than just
simple node names. Expect more robust indentation with fewer edge cases.

## Configurable gutters

Gutters can now be configured in your `config.toml` file. For example, you can
remove the line-number gutter while still showing LSP diagnostics.

```toml
[editor]
gutters = ["diagnostics"] # default is ["diagnostics", "line-numbers"]
```

## Local language configuration

Language configuration can now be specified local to a project. Create a
`.helix` directory and a `languages.toml` under it to override values from the
[default language configuration]. For example, override a C project's indents
to use tabs instead of spaces for indentation:

```toml
# my_c_project/.helix/languages.toml
[[language]]
name = "c"
indent = { tab-width = 8, unit = "\t" }
```

## Rulers

{{ asciinema(id="rulers", width="94", height="25") }}

Vertical rulers may now be configured through the `rulers` option. Use them
as a guide when adhering to a maximum line length.

## Show visible whitespace

{{ asciinema(id="visible-whitespace", width="94", height="25") }}

Whitespace characters like spaces, tabs, and newlines may now be rendered. Use
the `whitespace.render` option either at runtime with the `:set` command or
in your `config.toml` under the editor section. The characters used for tabs,
spaces, non-breaking space, and newlines may also be customized as well as
whether any of the characters are rendered at all. In fact, for the remaining
asciicasts in this post, you'll be seeing my custom tab and newline characters!

## Use registers in prompts

{{ asciinema(id="insert-registers-in-prompts", width="94", height="25") }}

Values stored in registers may now be used in prompts like search or global
search. In the above example, we yank a selection to the `"` register with
`y` and then open up the global search prompt with `Space` `/`. The available
registers are shown above the prompt and we hit `"` to insert the contents of
the `"` register.

## Reflow paragraphs

{{ asciinema(id="reflow", width="94", height="25") }}

The new `:reflow` command hard-wraps text to a given column width. Default
column widths may be configured on a per-language basis. Reflow recognizes
matching prefixes between lines, so you may reflow line-comments, markdown
quotes or lines with leading whitespace and the leading characters will be
placed appropriately.

## Swap windows

{{ asciinema(id="window-swapping", width="94", height="25") }}

Windows may now be swapped with neighbor windows and splits may be transposed.
With the window menu open (`C-w` or `space w`), use `H`, `J`, `K`, and `L`
to swap the current window with the left, down, up, and right neighbors,
respectively. Use `t` or `C-t` to switch between a vertical and horizontal
split or vice versa.

## Set a language at runtime

{{ asciinema(id="set-language", width="94", height="25") }}

The language for a buffer may now be set at runtime. Use
`:set-language language` (or `:lang language` for short) to set the language
and switch language servers.

## Wrapping up

These are just some highlights from the changes in 22.05. Check out the
[changelog] for the full set.

Expect plenty more features and improvements in Helix 22.07 coming in July.
Contribute and follow along with development in the
[GitHub repository][helix-git] and be sure to join in on discussions in the
[Matrix channel][matrix].

<script src="/asciinema-player.js"></script>
[changelog]: https://github.com/helix-editor/helix/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#2205-2022-05-17
[default language configuration]: https://docs.helix-editor.com/guides/adding_languages.html#language-configuration
[helix-git]: https://github.com/helix-editor/helix/
[matrix]: https://matrix.to/#/#helix-community:matrix.org
